README.md, before:

<img width="1027" height="460" alt="ds salaries screenshot" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f96daa88-3fad-44c4-9334-d76cc3c6614b" />

# My-first-project

I'm delighted to share my very first post on this platform as i progress with my learning as a Data analyst @VephlaUni. I built this dashboard to explore global salary trends across experience levels, job roles, company sizes and regions.

PROJECT SPLIT

Category One (independent value) 

Experience_Level 
Employment_Type
Job_Title
Company_Location
Company_Size

Category two (dependent value)

Salary_in_usd

INDUSTRY TYPE

Workforce Analytics
                                                                        
STORY OF DATA

This dataset captures a global view of employees salaries and work structures. It combines details about how people work (employment type, remote ratio), what they do (job titles), where they live and work (residence vs company location), and organizational characteristics (company size).

DATA VISUALIZATION AND CHARTS

Coulumn chart comparing company size by salary, and job title by salary
A layered bar chart showing Entry, Mid, Senior, and Executive salary progression.
Pie chart showing salary gap in portion.
map chart signifying salary range.

IN ANALYSIS- OBSERVATION

This dataset captures a global view of employees salaries and work structures. It combines details about how people work (employment type, remote ratio), what they do (job titles), where they live and work (residence vs company location), and organizational characteristics (company size).

Company Size:
Medium-sized companies dominate salary spending, contributing the vast majority of total salaries, while large companies contribute far less than expected and small companies contribute minimally.

Experience Level:
Salaries rise progressively from entry-level to executive positions. Entry level earns the lowest, mid-level marks a transition point, senior roles show a strong jump, and executives earn the highest overall.

Employment Type:
Full-time employees earn slightly above the salary benchmark and remain the best paid. Contract workers earn moderately. Freelancers and part-time workers earn the least, showing a major income gap across employment types.

Job Titles:
Data Engineers contribute the largest share of salary totals, followed by Data Scientists. Data Analysts earn significantly less, reflecting their entry-to-mid positioning. ML Engineers contribute the smallest share, likely due to fewer specialized roles but high future growth potential.

Geographical Trends:
Israel, the US, Puerto Rico, Russia, and Canada lead with the highest salary averages. Western Europe shows strong but variable salary levels, while developing regions (India, Vietnam, Macedonia, Bolivia) report much lower averages. Africa shows mixed results, with Nigeria standing out compared to neighboring countries. Some smaller regions (e.g., Bosnia, Puerto Rico) report unusually high salaries.

General Cross-Level Patterns:
Across all experience levels, medium-sized companies consistently pay the most. Full time employees earn around the benchmark or slightly above, while part-time and freelance workers earn significantly below average. Data Engineers consistently rank as the highest earners in every experience group, followed by Data Scientists, Analysts, and ML Engineers.

IN ANLYSIS- INSIGHTS

Experience Level:
Salaries increase steadily with experience, showing a strong progression system. The biggest jumps occur at senior and executive levels, motivating long-term retention. Entry-level roles earn the least but act as growth pipelines.

Employment Type:
Full-time employees earn the highest relative to the benchmark, reflecting their priority in organizational structures. Contract staff earn moderately, while freelancers and part-time workers earn significantly less, highlighting a major pay gap that may affect talent attraction and retention.

Job Title (Data Roles):
Data Engineers receive the highest salary share due to the critical need for strong data infrastructure. Data Scientists follow closely, while Analysts earn less as entry-to-mid-level roles. ML Engineers have the smallest share, likely due to fewer roles but strong growth potential as AI adoption rises.

Geographical Salary Trends:
Countries like Israel, the US, Japan, and Canada pay exceptionally high salaries due to strong tech ecosystems. Europe shows wide variations, while developing regions such as India, Vietnam, and Bolivia have significantly lower averages. Some countries like Puerto Rico, Russia, and Bosnia show unusually high salaries, likely due to niche markets. African nations vary, with Nigeria standing out as a potential regional tech hub.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

Experience Levels:
Salaries increase consistently from entry level ($78K) to mid-level ($104K), senior ($153K), and executive roles ($195K), showing a clear upward salary progression.

Employment Types:
Full-time employees earn around or slightly above the average salary at all experience levels. Contract staff earn moderately, while freelancers and part-time workers earn significantly less especially at mid and senior levels.

Company Size:
Medium-sized companies consistently contribute the largest salary totals at every experience level. Large companies pay far less, and small companies contribute the least.

Job Titles:
Data Engineers earn the highest salary totals across all levels, followed by Data Scientists. Data Analysts rank lower, and ML Engineers consistently have the smallest salary totals, reflecting fewer roles but strong specialization.

GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS/INSIGHTS

Entry Level:
The average salary is $78,546, with full-time staff earning slightly above this benchmark. Freelancers and contract staff earn near the average, while part-time workers earn significantly less. Company M leads salary spending, far ahead of Companies L and S. Across entry-level roles, Data Engineers earn the highest total salaries, indicating strong demand even at junior levels, while ML Engineers represent the smallest share due to fewer entry level positions.

Executive Level:
Executive salaries average $194,931, showing a large jump from mid-level roles. Pay is nearly equal for contract and full-time executives, suggesting standardized compensation at leadership levels. Company M again dominates in total executive salary payouts. Data Engineers surprisingly lead executive salary totals, reflecting high value placed on senior engineering leadership.

Mid Level:
The average mid-level salary is $104,526, about 33% higher than entry-level roles, showing steady career progression. Full-time staff earn slightly above average, while freelancers and part-time workers earn less than half indicating companies reward long-term, stable roles at this stage. Company M remains the primary contributor to mid-level salaries. Data Engineers earn the most, followed by Data Analysts and Data Scientists, while ML Engineers earn the least due to fewer roles at this level.

CONCLUSION

The findings show that salaries in data careers rise steadily with experience, with the highest pay at senior and executive levels, highlighting the strong value placed on expertise and leadership. Medium-sized companies consistently offer the highest total salary contributions, while full-time employees earn more than contract, freelance, and part-time workers 

Data Engineers are the highest-paid roles across all experience levels due to their critical role in data infrastructure, followed by Data Scientists, while ML Engineers represent a smaller but high-growth segment. Significant regional salary disparities exist, with countries like the US, Israel, and Canada offering the most competitive pay due to advanced tech ecosystems.

REFERENCES

Deloitte. (2022). Global Human Capital Trends.

International Labour Organization (ILO). (2023). Global Wage Report.

McKinsey & Company. (2023). State of Data & AI Talent.

OECD. (2023). Employment Outlook.

World Bank. (2023). World Development Report.

Commit message:

Update salary recommendations and insights in README
Revised salary insights for entry, mid, and executive levels, emphasizing career progression and compensation strategies.

README.md, after:

<img width="1027" height="460" alt="ds salaries screenshot" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f96daa88-3fad-44c4-9334-d76cc3c6614b" />

# My-first-project

I'm delighted to share my very first post on this platform as i progress with my learning as a Data analyst @VephlaUni. I built this dashboard to explore global salary trends across experience levels, job roles, company sizes and regions.

PROJECT SPLIT

Category One (independent value) 

Experience_Level 
Employment_Type
Job_Title
Company_Location
Company_Size

Category two (dependent value)

Salary_in_usd

INDUSTRY TYPE

Workforce Analytics
                                                                        
STORY OF DATA

This dataset captures a global view of employees salaries and work structures. It combines details about how people work (employment type, remote ratio), what they do (job titles), where they live and work (residence vs company location), and organizational characteristics (company size).

DATA VISUALIZATION AND CHARTS

Coulumn chart comparing company size by salary, and job title by salary
A layered bar chart showing Entry, Mid, Senior, and Executive salary progression.
Pie chart showing salary gap in portion.
map chart signifying salary range.

IN ANALYSIS- OBSERVATION

This dataset captures a global view of employees salaries and work structures. It combines details about how people work (employment type, remote ratio), what they do (job titles), where they live and work (residence vs company location), and organizational characteristics (company size).

Company Size:
Medium-sized companies dominate salary spending, contributing the vast majority of total salaries, while large companies contribute far less than expected and small companies contribute minimally.

Experience Level:
Salaries rise progressively from entry-level to executive positions. Entry level earns the lowest, mid-level marks a transition point, senior roles show a strong jump, and executives earn the highest overall.

Employment Type:
Full-time employees earn slightly above the salary benchmark and remain the best paid. Contract workers earn moderately. Freelancers and part-time workers earn the least, showing a major income gap across employment types.

Job Titles:
Data Engineers contribute the largest share of salary totals, followed by Data Scientists. Data Analysts earn significantly less, reflecting their entry-to-mid positioning. ML Engineers contribute the smallest share, likely due to fewer specialized roles but high future growth potential.

Geographical Trends:
Israel, the US, Puerto Rico, Russia, and Canada lead with the highest salary averages. Western Europe shows strong but variable salary levels, while developing regions (India, Vietnam, Macedonia, Bolivia) report much lower averages. Africa shows mixed results, with Nigeria standing out compared to neighboring countries. Some smaller regions (e.g., Bosnia, Puerto Rico) report unusually high salaries.

General Cross-Level Patterns:
Across all experience levels, medium-sized companies consistently pay the most. Full time employees earn around the benchmark or slightly above, while part-time and freelance workers earn significantly below average. Data Engineers consistently rank as the highest earners in every experience group, followed by Data Scientists, Analysts, and ML Engineers.

IN ANLYSIS- INSIGHTS

Experience Level:
Salaries increase steadily with experience, showing a strong progression system. The biggest jumps occur at senior and executive levels, motivating long-term retention. Entry-level roles earn the least but act as growth pipelines.

Employment Type:
Full-time employees earn the highest relative to the benchmark, reflecting their priority in organizational structures. Contract staff earn moderately, while freelancers and part-time workers earn significantly less, highlighting a major pay gap that may affect talent attraction and retention.

Job Title (Data Roles):
Data Engineers receive the highest salary share due to the critical need for strong data infrastructure. Data Scientists follow closely, while Analysts earn less as entry-to-mid-level roles. ML Engineers have the smallest share, likely due to fewer roles but strong growth potential as AI adoption rises.

Geographical Salary Trends:
Countries like Israel, the US, Japan, and Canada pay exceptionally high salaries due to strong tech ecosystems. Europe shows wide variations, while developing regions such as India, Vietnam, and Bolivia have significantly lower averages. Some countries like Puerto Rico, Russia, and Bosnia show unusually high salaries, likely due to niche markets. African nations vary, with Nigeria standing out as a potential regional tech hub.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

Experience Levels:
Salaries increase consistently from entry level ($78K) to mid-level ($104K), senior ($153K), and executive roles ($195K), showing a clear upward salary progression.

Employment Types:
Full-time employees earn around or slightly above the average salary at all experience levels. Contract staff earn moderately, while freelancers and part-time workers earn significantly less especially at mid and senior levels.

Company Size:
Medium-sized companies consistently contribute the largest salary totals at every experience level. Large companies pay far less, and small companies contribute the least.

Job Titles:
Data Engineers earn the highest salary totals across all levels, followed by Data Scientists. Data Analysts rank lower, and ML Engineers consistently have the smallest salary totals, reflecting fewer roles but strong specialization.

GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS/INSIGHTS

Organizations should promote clear career progression to retain talent as salaries rise significantly at senior levels. Medium-sized companies can continue leveraging competitive pay to attract skilled professionals, while larger firms may need to reassess compensation strategies. Full-time roles should remain a priority for core data functions, and greater investment should be placed in high-value roles such as Data Engineers. Finally, region-specific pay strategies and continuous skill development at entry and mid levels can help organizations remain competitive and build sustainable data teams.

CONCLUSION

The findings show that salaries in data careers rise steadily with experience, with the highest pay at senior and executive levels, highlighting the strong value placed on expertise and leadership. Medium-sized companies consistently offer the highest total salary contributions, while full-time employees earn more than contract, freelance, and part-time workers 

Data Engineers are the highest-paid roles across all experience levels due to their critical role in data infrastructure, followed by Data Scientists, while ML Engineers represent a smaller but high-growth segment. Significant regional salary disparities exist, with countries like the US, Israel, and Canada offering the most competitive pay due to advanced tech ecosystems.

REFERENCES

Deloitte. (2022). Global Human Capital Trends.

International Labour Organization (ILO). (2023). Global Wage Report.

McKinsey & Company. (2023). State of Data & AI Talent.

OECD. (2023). Employment Outlook.

World Bank. (2023). World Development Report.
